Navy's underwater allies: Dolphins

By Gidget Fuentes, Staff Writer

Photos by Hayne Palmour

Copyright North County Times

POINT LOMA ---- When it comes to operating in dangerous shores or deep
oceans, the U.S. military often turns to a unique force based in Point
Loma: marine mammals.

The Navy uses 65 bottlenose dolphins, 15 sea lions and two whales to
help detect dangerous mines in deep waters, find combat divers, and haul
tools and equipment to underwater labs.

Dolphins help clear mines or help prevent enemy divers "from blowing up
a ship," said Tom LaPuzza, a spokesman for the San Diego-based Space and
Naval Warfare Systems Center, which runs the Navy's $15 million Marine
Mammal Program. "They protect people's lives. Basically, that's what
they are there for."

Hapa, a 24-year-old male bottle-nose dolphin, opened his mouth wide to
signal that he's ready for another fish treat as he was being moved in a
padded transport mat towards the stern of the USS Duluth to be put on a
small Navy power boat for a mine search exercise off San Diego. Hapa was
one of four Navy dolphins on the USS Duluth that were participating in
the Kernal Blitz training exercises.

Navy marine mammal handler Marshall Palmer put his hand on Hapa as he
was being transported to the stern of the USS Duluth to be put on a
small Navy power boat.

Recently, eight dolphins and five sea lions joined 15,000 troops for the
military exercise "Kernel Blitz '01" recently off Camp Pendleton Marine
Corps Base. The sleek gray dolphins, operating from portable pools on
ships, helped find and mark test mines during Navy and Marine Corps
mine-hunting and amphibious training. The sea lions recovered test mines
at the end of the exercise.

Program officials say the training is important for their dolphins and
sea lions, including some that the Navy has used in real military
situations.

Navy dolphins have been deployed to so-called "hot zones" twice in their
program's history, first in Vietnam from 1970 to 1971 and then in the
Persian Gulf from 1987 to 1988 to help protect the USS LaSalle, then the
Navy's flagship in the region, LaPuzza said.

The unique unit also has served in peacetime. During the 1996 Republican
Convention in San Diego, dolphins were used in San Diego Bay to help
provide security along the convention center's waterfront.

"The concern was: What if? What are you going to do if something comes
in along the water?" LaPuzza recalled.

Military use criticized

Until 1992, the public knew little about the Marine Mammal Program,
which the Navy kept a classified secret. Even at the Cold War's end,
Navy officials still remained elusive about program details.

Navy officials say the animals are safe, healthy and cared for in a good
environment.

LaPuzza said the dolphins live and operate in a more-natural sea-water
environment where they can interact with other marine life, rather than
in tanks.

Since the 1960s, animal-rights activists have opposed the animals'
custody and use for military missions.

In 1990, the Progressive Animal Welfare Society persuaded the Navy to
stop using dolphins in Puget Sound and has pushed for ways to safely
reintroduce into the wild older dolphins retired by the Navy.

A longtime critic of dolphin captivity and military uses is Richard
O'Barry, author of "To Free A Dolphin," founder of The Dolphin Project
and dolphin trainer for the 1960s TV show, "Flipper."

"I like the Navy," O'Barry, a former sailor, said from his Florida home.
"But what is wrong with it is using dolphins as 'advanced biological
weapons systems.' "

The dolphin's attractiveness is its keen sonar system, which is "so
sophisticated, it makes our sonar ---- the Navy's best sonar ---- a
toy," he said.

O'Barry said he first learned of the program 40 years ago, when the CIA
sought to recruit him to help it use dolphins in Cold War efforts. Like
those of Russia and other foreign militaries, he said, the program "is
intended to use dolphins to kill people."

Navy officials declined to respond to O'Barry's comments.

Learning from dolphins

Dolphins first became part of the Navy in 1960. Scientists studying the
dolphins' hydrodynamics thought their smooth skin and speed could help
design better submarines, ship hulls and weapons.

Dolphins hear and navigate by using their natural sonar, and scientists
soon realized that this trait is more precise than some modern man-made
sonar systems.

In 1965, a Navy dolphin carried tools and mail 200 feet between the
surface and personnel in the underwater laboratory off the coast of La
Jolla. The fact that the dolphins could run untethered and return home
drew interest from Navy leaders.

By nature, dolphins are naturally reliable and trustworthy animals who
seem to enjoy pleasing their human handlers, LaPuzza said. When they are
released into the ocean for missions, "they come back to the handler,
the trainer" ashore or on a ship.

Of nearly 500,000 releases so far in the Navy program, only nine animals
were lost and never found, he said. Most disappeared in sudden storms
near the Hawaiian Islands. To date, LaPuzza said that no animal has been
lost in a mission.

The mammals themselves do present enough weight or mass to detonate any
of the live mines, he said.

Today, in addition to the 65 Atlantic or Pacific bottlenose dolphins,
the Navy program includes 15 sea lions and two white beluga whales.

Sea lions have good hearing and can dive much deeper than dolphins. They
are used to mark mines and retrieve torpedoes or practice mines and are
twice as effective at recovering mines than human divers, LaPuzza said.
"We figure it saves us about $1 million a year."

The white beluga whales, which go deeper to recover inert torpedoes, are
currently on loan from SeaWorld, he said.

Home on the bay

The marine mammals are housed at a bayside complex near the Point Loma
Navy Submarine Base. The dolphins live in a complex of four 30-foot by
30-foot individual floating pens connected to a 30-foot by 60-foot
"living area."

They are trained, fed and cared for by about 35 Navy civilian handlers,
plus contracted trainers and sailors. An Army veterinarian, three
veterinary technicians and a civilian Navy worker provide full-time
medical care, LaPuzza said.

The dolphins range in age from under 1 year to 42 years, with 12 animals
more than 30 years old, LaPuzza said.

Six dolphins are pregnant. New mothers and calves are kept together, a
practice that parallels the normal bonding in nature, LaPuzza noted.
This has an added benefit, he said: Trainers teach the mothers, whose
behaviors in turn are mimicked by their youngsters.

The Navy feeds about 20 pounds of fish, including cod, mackerel and
squid, to each dolphin daily, depending on its health, environmental
conditions and training routine. A dolphin preparing for a training
mission in the colder Alaskan waters, for example, may get more fish "to
build up a blubber layer," LaPuzza said.

Training is a constant, he said.

Trainers daily get the dolphins to do certain behaviors, such as waving
their fins out of the water or rolling over on their side, by feeding
them fish. The trainer then can inspect the fin or a veterinarian can
draw blood for laboratory analysis.

Constant checks are important, he said, because the animals "are very
good at masking their symptoms until, sometimes, they are dead."

A sick dolphin can be vulnerable to attacks from predators such as
sharks, so trainers keep a constant keen eye on the dolphins. For a
recent military exercise in Alaska, one dolphin had the sniffles,
LaPuzza said. "We kept him home."

The Navy gets about 20 to 25 years of service for each dolphin. "They
tend to be very good at what they do for a long period of time," LaPuzza
said. "We're learning more as we go that the capabilities of the animals
still go on."

Dolphin operations in shallow waters is the Navy's newest area of
training. Officials say waters 10 to 40 feet deep are a tough place for
Navy sonar systems and crews to find and hunt for mines. But LaPuzza
said a dolphin's sonar works better than mechanical sonars in shallow
waters because dolphins can hone in on specific sounds even around the
clutter of noises from boat engines, people, waves and water lapping
against a pier.

A dolphin, he explained, can hear through the din and focus better. "The
animals work best in shallow water, where there's lots of noise," he
added.

Contact staff writer Gidget Fuentes at (760) 901-4072 or
gfuentes@nctimes.com. 

